Add schemeful same-site to incrementalism (#3)
mikewest/cookie-incrementalism: draft-west-cookie-incrementalism.md

    -
      ins: M. Nottingham
      name: Mark Nottingham
      organization: Fastly

--- abstract

> This document proposes three changes to cookies inspired by the properties of

Author: Done

    This is spelled out in more detail in {{require-secure}}.

3. Ensure the scheme, as well as the registrable domain, of the
   "site for cookies" and request match when making a same-site decision.
   That is, "http://site.example" and "https://site.example" should be

>    considered cross-site.

Reviewer: How about:

```suggestion
3. Require both the scheme and registrable domain of a request's client's "site for cookies"
   to match the target URL when deciding whether a given request is considered same-site.
   That is, a request initiated from "http://site.example" to "https://site.example" should be
   considered cross-site.
```

Author: Done

This is conceptually similar to the requirements put into place for the `__Secure-` prefix (Section
4.1.3.1 of {{RFC6265bis}}).

## Schemeful Same-Site {#schemeful-samesite}

By using the scheme, as well as the registrable domain, schemeful same-site can
help to protect https origins against a network attacker that is impersonating
an http origin with the same registrable domain, thereby further increasing

> SameSite's CSRF protections. To do so we need to modify a number of things:

Reviewer: How about:

```suggestion
By considering the scheme as well as the registrable domain when determining whether a
given request is "same-site", the `SameSite` attribute can protect secure origins from CSRF
attacks initiated by a network attacker that can forge requests from a non-secure origin on
the same registrable domain. To do so we need to modify a number of things:
```

Author: Done

First change the definition of "site for cookies" from a registrable domain to
an origin. In the places where a we return an empty string for a non-existent
"site for cookies" we should instead return an origin set to a freshly
generated globally unique identifier.

Then replace the same-site calculation algorithm with the following:

~~~
Two origins, A and B, are considered same-site if the following algorithm returns true:

> 1.  If A and B are both scheme/host/port triples then

Reviewer: 1.  Nit: Newline above.
2.  It's probably best to shift towards HTML's terminology here of "tuple origin" (vs "opaque origin").

Author: 1. Done
2. I was trying to stick close to the IETF terminology given that this will, ideally, become part of an IETF doc in order to keep terms internally consistent. That being said, if you'd still like me to change over to the HTML version I can do that. It'll make the wording less awkward as well.

Reviewer 2: What about RFC 6454 is still relevant to web browsers?

Reviewer: The algorithms are all outdated, as are the UA requirements. Some of the non-normative text is valuable. I think all the important parts are covered in URL and HTML. If @mnot, et al. are happy to consider the RFC obsoleted by those specifications, I'm happy to link to them. Based on my vague recollection of some discussions of URLs, my intuition is that there'd be some dispute about that.

    1.  If A's scheme does not equal B's scheme, return false.

    2.  Let hostA be A's host, and hostB be B's host.

>         1.  If hostA equals hostB and hostA's registrable domain is null, return true.

Reviewer: 1. These shouldn't be nested, as 2 isn't a conditional or loop.

2. I think this aims to deal with `github.io` or `appspot.com` hosting content, and being same-site with themselves? What should we do when `yandexcloud.net` makes a request to `storage.yandexcloud.net` (both of which are on the PSL)? What about `cust.dev.thingdust.io` (on the PSL) making a request to `thingdust.io` (not on the PSL)?

Author: 1. Done.
2. Yeah, this part is to allow for same-siteness of the same PSL entities.
To your other points I have no clue what to do beyond a gut reaction of "If they went out of their way to get different domains added to the PSL they should have to deal with SameSite=None". Maybe @davidben would have some more informed opinions on this? 
If we do decide on doing something different than what's already written there then we should let the HTML folks know because that algorithm is lifted from the HTML spec.

Reviewer 3: I think this definition and HTML's should match. Ideally we'd simply cite HTML, but I do not know what the status of IETF vs WHATWG silliness is. Although having to redefine all WHATWG definitions would make the IETF an hindrance to interop, which would be a spectacular failure of the spec venue to do its core job. So maybe it is worth cutting through the red tape and getting that citation to work.

Regarding prefixes of PSL entries, I think same-site should be closed under transitivity, otherwise the concept can't be used in places like storage isolation. Thus we need to say that `https://example` and `https://etld.example` are cross-site from `https://foo.etld.example` given that we want `https://foo.etld.example` and `https://bar.etld.example` to be cross-site.

        2.  If hostA's registrable domain equals hostB's registrable domain and is non-null, return true.

> 2.  If A and B are both the same globally unique identifier, return true.

Reviewer: As above, I'd like to shift towards "opaque origin".

Author: See my above comment.

3.  Return false.

> Note: The port component of the origins is not considered.

Reviewer: At the risk of creating work: why not? I mean, I assume it would break something somewhere... do we have any data on cookie usage on portful URLs? :)

Author: No data that I'm aware of.
Is there some immediate benefit to scoping to the port? Similar to how scoping to scheme protects us from a same domain network attacker?

Reviewer: The main benefit is sanity. The closer we get to an origin as a security boundary, the happier I'll be.

That said, I agree that targeting the scheme is a reasonable place to begin... See also the conversation under https://twitter.com/yoavweiss/status/1235963605213986817.

A request is "same-site" if its target's URI's origin
is same-site with the request's client's "site for cookies", or if the
request has no client. The request is otherwise "cross-site".
~~~

Now that we have a new algorithm, we can update any comparision of two sites
from "have the same registrable domain" (or "is an exact match for") to say
"is same-site".

> Note: The request's URL when establishing a WebSockets connection has scheme "http" or "https", rather than "ws" or "wss". FETCH maps schemes when constructing the request. This mapping allows same-site cookies to be sent with WebSockets. We should do the same.

Reviewer: I think this is quite reasonable to note, but it's not a "should". Given the way we interact with Fetch via 5.17.1.1 of https://fetch.spec.whatwg.org/#http-network-or-cache-fetch, this document never sees `wss` or `ws`, but `https` and `http`. :)

Author: Removed the "should" phrasing.
